One, two, three, four, one, two, three, four, one, two, three, four.
One, two, three, four, one, two, three, four.
This is February the 20th, and we're in the former student, no, the foundation, NM Foundation building.
and I have the joy and pleasure and honor of chatting with James Randall Mattson, once of Pampa, Texas.
Randy, to begin with, introduce yourself to anybody that might hear this tape or read the transcription.
Describe growing up in Pampa, your parents, when did you all move there, what did your dad do, others in the family, and so forth.
Well, I go by Randy Mattson, and always have.
Probably be known better by that.
I was born in Kilgore, Texas in 1945.
My dad worked in the oil fields, grew up working in the oil fields.
Everybody in my, his family worked in the oil fields.
Six months after I was born, he was transferred to Borger, Texas, which in those days, the Texas Panhandle was kind of the latest hot oil patch in Texas, I guess, and there was a lot going on in those days.
Lived there until I started the first grade, and then at that point he was transferred to Pampa, which is about
35 miles probably from Borger, but a lot more than that.
Culturally, it's about like the difference between Austin and College Station.
A lot of difference between a Pampa Harvester and a Borger Bulldog.
If I'd stayed in Borger, I'd never picked up a shot put probably.
I went to public schools all through Pampa.
My dad worked for the same oil company, oil servicing company, Dowell, through those years.
Started my organized sports at the age of nine when they started Little League Baseball in Pampa, Texas.
It was the first institution that was integrated in Pampa in those days.
That was the back before
and most of the schools in Texas had separate schools, separate facilities, and Little League Baseball was the first time that that had ever happened.
And we got out and built the ballparks ourselves.
One of the stipulations of playing is you had to work on the ballparks themselves.
So that was my first organized athletics in those days.
Went through the elementary school there.
I participated in most sports.
When I got to high school, I had to decide somewhat.
Pampa had been a longtime basketball power and pretty down in football.
There was a lot of pressure for me to participate in basketball.
and also a lot of pressure for me to participate in football.
I was also by that time fairly active in track and field and had kind of settled on throwing the shot put and discus in the weight events.
By the time I got to high school I was 6'6 and weighed about 210-15 pounds.
Now that's in the ninth or tenth grade?
That would have been the tenth grade.
I was 6'3 and 185 in the ninth grade.
Then I was 6'6 and a half after the summer and had a fear of being seven foot tall.
If I'd have been, I couldn't see at that time that there would have been a benefit to be seven foot tall.
I might have made some money playing basketball because later on in my basketball career at A&M, I found out that 6'6 wasn't quite big enough.
But I thoroughly enjoyed my career at Pampa and felt very fortunate to be from a West Texas town with one high school where everybody expected a great deal of you but supported you.
I remember the feeling of not wanting to go downtown when we were beating football or basketball on Saturday morning.
We kind of hid out.
Now in football you played what?
In football, I played my sophomore and senior year.
I was injured a lot in my sophomore year.
I had a couple broken, a foot that was broken two or three times, kept re-breaking it.
And then elected because of track and basketball not to play my junior year.
And then I came back my senior year.
My senior year I played fullback and defensive end.
and also played basketball on track and field.
And basketball, y'all were good.
In basketball, my senior year, we were 30-2.
We were defeated in my district, upset, and felt like we were one of the teams favored to play for the state championship that year, which Pampa had done more than the 4A school at that time.
And that was one of my big disappointments in my athletic career is losing that game against, at that time it was called Birdville, Haltom City, Fort Worth.
And were you the center?
I was the center.
And we had at least four or five players off that team go to college on basketball scholarships.
We had a good basketball team.
Football, we were very mediocre and won three or four games.
Was that basketball coach, was he important in any of your development?
Well, he was.
He took over my sophomore year from a long-time, very successful coach, Clifton McNeely.
Oh, he took, oh, this wasn't McNeely.
He was assistant, and he took over.
And he...
So I didn't have the opportunity to really work much under Coach McNeely.
My basketball coach name was Terry Cully and coached there all through years and later on moved on.
at the end of that year.
Well, in football we were not very successful.
I made all district defensive end and then in basketball we had a good team and I was fortunate to make first team All-State so I was recruited somewhat in both of them.
Surprisingly in football except I was fairly good big then.
I wasn't very heavy and I was the
one of the fastest runners on the team, I guess, for my size.
But then in track and field, my junior year in high school I won the state championship.
When did you start throwing the shot?
I started throwing the shot in, actually the first time was in the sixth grade.
We had a sixth grade track meet and we signed up for different events.
And I won the 50 and the 100 and the high jump.
in the long jump, and I finished sixth in the shot put.
So being real smart, I picked the shot put.
That's the way it works.
But you didn't have to do all that running when you were a shot putter, except you had to work out pretty hard.
By the time I got to junior high, I had started moving more toward... Is there anybody who deserves credit for encouraging you to concentrate on track, on the shot?
Well, I had a number of coaches that encouraged me all along.
You know, I guess everyone I ever had, I benefited from in some way.
But I had one particular coach, Dwayne Lyons, who was the head track coach and line coach in football.
And he was the old ex-Marine, tough, rough coach that demanded a lot out of you.
As a matter of fact, he's the only coach I've ever really had that I was afraid of, you know.
But he expected a lot out of me.
I can remember my junior year, he was my coach.
He had to leave out between my junior and senior year.
My junior year, I was leading the state in the discus and we went to the West Texas Relays in Odessa, Texas.
It was a big event and they made a big deal in the paper about me being the state leader there in the discus at that time.
And I fouled on my first three throws and didn't even make the qualifying and I remember
feeling bad and standing there and somebody came up to me and said you may want another copy of this out of the paper about you being here and hand it to me and he walked up and said what is that and looked at it and tore it up and threw it down and walked off and and we didn't talk for another couple of weeks but I didn't get beat again in the discus the rest of the year and but anyway I went on from there and I was very fortunate to win the state championship and the shot in discus probably early in the year would not have been one that would have been favored to do that
and also set a state record.
And so that kind of set the stage for me having to decide what I was going to do at some point.
My senior year I came back and broke both of those records in the shot and discus and also was recruited
quite a bit in basketball and some in football.
You told me once upon a time about, I think it was after the state meet of your junior year, you're back home by yourself.
Right.
I came back and my coach had been told that he was not going to be rehired.
They were making a football change and he'd asked to stay on just to coach me.
And they declined on that.
What's interesting, he went on to California, took over a head job at a new high school that never played football, and in three years won the state championship in California, but that's another story, I guess.
But one day, before school's out, we're out there, and I asked him if I could throw a 16-pound shot, which was a college shot, just to see how far I could throw it.
And he had one up in the attic.
crawled up there, got it down, handed it to me, Rusty, and we went out there and he watched me and worked with me and I threw 55 feet, which the Southwest Conference record at that time was 57, held by an Aggie.
And so we were sitting down there talking and he looked at me and said, someday if you want to, you can go to the Olympics.
If you want to, bad enough.
And that's the first time I'd ever thought about Olympic games, anything like that.
But I don't guess I ever went out to practice or do anything with it again that I didn't think about it.
And I'm sure he wasn't thinking about planting a seed like that at the time, but then it was fun over the years when I'd go to California, he'd get to watch me compete and was usually pretty critical of what I would do even though I was the best in the country at that time.
But anyway, that was kind of a defining moment, I guess,
I think from that moment on, I really knew that I was going to be a shot putter and discus thrower.
It wasn't the glamour that the other sports had.
There was nothing you could do with it after your years of competing, but I really enjoyed the training by myself and the working by myself.
I was recruited by over 100 schools to go.
Before we talk about that recruitment, as you look back now, what kind of values, attitudes did you get out of family and out of teachers and coaches?
Well, I think it was kind of a lot simpler time in those days.
My mother and dad were very supportive of my competing
They really didn't understand my interest in it as much.
They were not involved in formal sports that much, but they gave me the opportunity to do it.
They never questioned, you know, the time that I was putting in and coming home late and doing that.
And they would go and watch me, but I didn't get a lot of criticism or, you know, my dad's attitude, it's your choice to do it, and if you don't like the coach, well, then you don't have to do it kind of thing.
But I remember coming home and
getting in late from out of town basketball game they may have listened to on the radio and saying, I sure didn't do very well.
My dad would say, you sure did.
And mother gripping him for being negative.
But that was just the way it was.
But they encouraged me in a way I think that was positive because they came out to watch.
I used to think my dad sure likes...
sports until I quit competing.
He never went back.
Now, you worked out then every day, year round almost, didn't you, in some sport?
After, yeah, it was all year round, even in summers, and after probably my sophomore year in high school.
It was pretty scary.
In terms of what you were eating and drinking, what was your routine?
No, that was before, even before weightlifting then, really.
My high school coach that I mentioned,
Coach Lyons, he made my first barbell that I got to use out of 75 pounds.
He got two buckets and put concrete in them and a bar in it and it weighed 75 pounds and we did a few exercises with that.
But there was a concern about being muscle-bound and being non-athletic.
And, boy, has that changed today.
But I didn't have much time to do that anyway because there's not an off-season to lift weights and train.
I just go from one to the other.
And I think that was a...
advantage in some ways too, to get to do all the different sports and develop some different skills.
Was there anything that you tried to eat or not eat?
Oh, not really.
I was frustrated because I couldn't get bigger and gain weight.
And I was naturally kind of a lanky build and it was frustrating to me because when people would see me they wouldn't think I was a shot putter, you know, and I looked more like a basketball player.
But in the long run I think that was an advantage too because I had the longer muscles and leaner muscles.
When I came to A&M, then I really got serious about getting bigger and had some people that knew what to do, but I didn't know.
Now in high school, what did you and your buddies do for a good time?
Like you say, I went from one sport to the other.
I don't ever remember eating supper with my family because it was always on the stove when I got home.
But on Saturday night, y'all must have done that.
Well, we'd go to the drive-in theater, you know.
That was about it in Pampa.
Wasn't a lot to do.
I wasn't a hunter.
A lot of them liked to go out and shoot rabbits and stuff.
I never didn't care about that.
Was beer leaving legal in Pampa?
Yeah, did, you know, that was such a, there was some of that.
I didn't participate in that in high school, but there was a, there was some of that, but boy, the penalty was great if you got caught.
You're kicked off the team, you know, any athlete.
Matter of fact,
The coaches used to go through the cafeteria and we couldn't drink Cokes or eat the dessert in the cafeteria.
So you had to sneak around and drink Cokes.
That would make you short-winded.
It was a big shock when I came to A&M at halftime, a basketball game, they brought Cokes in.
I couldn't believe it.
The coach would give you a Coke.
That was just one of those things that... Did your parents have any conduct rules for you?
They had some strong expectations.
I don't know that we ever sat down and really talked about rules.
My curfew was around 11 to 12.
I say that around because if I wasn't home by 11, they better have heard from me.
And I could call at 11 and say, well, you know, we're not doing it.
We're just, I'm going to work somewhere.
We've run a little late, 11.30.
They just wanted to know.
And that kind of...
I always felt like that they wanted to know where I was at and what I was doing and as long as that was
there wasn't a lot of concerns and but in those days you kind of stayed with the same friends almost all the way through and the parents knew each other and you were at one of them's house or just hanging out because very few had cars and the chance to go do things in so it was it was a lot different and you're you and your family were church goers my no not really when i was young we my
My parents didn't go much.
They were raised to, then they didn't too much.
And so early on we didn't
I didn't do a lot of that.
I really started doing that more after I got to A&M.
Oh, okay.
Recruiting.
When did somebody first start talking to you about where to go to college?
Well, when I was a junior in high school, the recruiting rules were a lot different then.
They could make unlimited contacts.
They could call you.
They could come by.
And the first two that I really remember were OU, because it was close.
We're closer to OU than we are to College Station, a lot closer.
And they actually took me up there, flew me up there on a private plane my junior year to watch a football game.
They were recruiting me in football a little bit, basketball, and track.
And the other was University of Southern California.
And they had a great history.
They had Dallas Sloan, who had been a world record holder, Perry O'Brien, Rink Babkin, the Discus.
And they had a coach by the name of Vern Wolf who was
Dallas Long's coach in high school in Phoenix and then also the coach at Southern Cal.
And he came out to see me my junior year and really recruited me probably on a regular basis harder than anyone to come to University of Southern California.
Now, all right, that was in your junior year.
All right, then when did it, when did the volume?
Well, my senior year, it really picked up, and especially after my junior year when I broke the state, because I think I led the nation, even my junior year in shot and discus.
And that was before there was a real limitation on track scholarships and stuff, so a lot of schools gave more scholarships than they do today.
And that was before women's athletics.
And then I had coaches coming by and calling, and you know, it got to where my
parents just wanted to hide out, you know.
They didn't answer the phone and they let me talk to them.
After that, I narrowed it down fairly early though to A&M Texas.
And the main reason for that, Texas Tech a little bit because they were close and they had a good basketball program then, but didn't have much of a track program.
Abilene Christian,
A&M, Texas, and Rice had the best track in those days, and they were nationally competitive.
And probably the best track program was Abilene Christian.
It was a smaller school, and I did visit with them a little bit.
But I narrowed it down, and a part of that was influenced by what would be legal today, but there was an Aggie in Pampa that was a lawyer,
And there was a University of Texas lawyer and they just tried to sell me on going to A&M in Texas like you would think they would do.
And they had campaigns for, you know, I'm getting calls from Longhorns all over the state and the letters and the Aggies.
Coach Thomas, track coach at A&M, he must have sent something out to A&M clubs, because I got all these letters from all over the state of Texas.
And most of them from A&M were positive, and I kept a lot of those letters over the years and looked back and had an opportunity to get to know some of those people when I went to work here.
But most of the A&M letters were positive in that they,
You know, they were from the president of a bank and all their letterheads and stuff, and I was very impressed how successful these guys had been.
But their experience at A&M, and it's positive, where most of the University of Texas letters were saying, if you go to A&M, we'll never hear from you again, and that's the, you know, it's the sorryest place in the world.
And I had a little trouble figuring that out, but I didn't have any background with either one, so I decided to visit both of them.
and did that and I visited at Oklahoma and really didn't go look at hardly any other schools, Texas Tech.
I stopped at Baylor on the way to the state track meeting one time and they got turned in for illegally working me out because I practiced out there, which was kind of a joke back then, but somebody had said they had tried me out at Baylor.
Baylor had a coach that was a very good coach, Jack Patterson.
At that time, he switched to the University of Texas
and he was put in a moral dilemma because he'd been recruiting me for Baylor.
I really thought a lot of him.
and he really couldn't recruit me from University of Texas and so they left it to Darrell Royal and people like that called me but I was interested in who the coach was.
And so even when I visited over there it was a awkward situation for him
And they had a football coach pick me up and, you know, did some, and really hit me hard about playing basketball, and I could do both.
And so I ruled Texas out pretty early.
They took me to a fraternity.
A lot of the athletes were in fraternities, and they had a party out at the lake.
And, you know, when I came to A&M, they took me to an A&M Texas baseball game, and I got to watch that and had Aggies.
the rivalry between A&M and Texas, so.
And didn't you fly once to LA?
Oh, that's right, I did, I did fly, and Southern Cal was where I was going to school, through my junior year and early in my senior year.
And I flew out there,
And just based on track that's where I would have gone.
And I flew out there though and it was quite a cultural shock.
Didn't you meet some celebrities?
Well they, you know, it was the first time I'd flown on a jet plane, you know, they flew me out there.
They had an alumnus fly with me from Texas that was, which was all legal in those days.
He met me in Amarillo and we flew out there.
I stayed at the Beverly Hills Hotel.
Remember I brought the key back, kept that key for years.
took me to Disneyland and I finally asked when did I get to see and I got to the celebrities I got to meet were Dallas Long and Perry O'Brien and Rink Babka who were legends already then and and they told me if I come to Southern Cal I'll be just like them you know and that was pretty pretty strong stuff and but
It was quite a cultural shock for a kid from Tampa, Texas to go to Los Angeles in those days and University of Southern California.
And I said, where do you live and wherever you want to live?
You know, it was a different day.
They didn't have an athletic dorm or anything like that in those days.
So I ruled that out pretty early on.
And so it really came down to A&M in Texas pretty quick.
Describe that special Saturday that you came up to College Station.
Well, the Aggie that, come on.
A good friend over all these years was the attorney that had gone to A&M.
He'd been on the golf team.
His name's Malcolm Douglas, and he's class of 53 at A&M.
And he was a very low-key guy.
He never put any pressure on me.
He really wanted what was best for me, and if A&M was best, then that was going to be a good thing.
If it wasn't, I could have gone somewhere else, and he wouldn't have said a word.
But he flew down with me, and we brought my best friend, who wanted to go to A&M too,
or thought was thinking about going.
And the name of Don Ayres.
That's A-Y-R-E-S.
And so we flew down to Houston and we were picked up, which is legal in those days, by two Aggies.
about as great as Aggies can get.
John Lindsey, class of 44 who was on the Board of Regents and the President of the Association of Former Students and about anything else that had at A&M.
Billman's named after him and
And the other one was a fellow named Jack Knox, who was a medical doctor, who was one of the Aggies in Houston, class of 46, and later became president of the Association.
But they picked me up at the airport in a big white Cadillac.
I've never been in a Cadillac.
and they're going to drive me the scenic route to College Station.
In those days, you could come through Hempstead and Avisota, but they were going to take me down to Conroe and cut across, even though they normally didn't go that way.
Well, it's dark, and they're trying all the way there selling me.
And they can't find the turnoff.
And so I said, you know, this is kind of bad.
These guys are such big Aggies, they can't find the place.
You know, if they can't find it.
And then they had a flat and had help fix the flat.
And by the time we got there, I was getting to wonder if there was such a place or if we'd ever find it.
and uh but it was a turned out to be a great experience and and both of those even though Dr. Knox is deceased now became very considerable great friends and were good to me long after I'd
finished at A&M.
And that was one of the things that they tried to sell you on at A&M in those days.
And it turned out to be true that the relationships that you make stay with you.
And that was where it was different.
And that was the way they sold me on A&M in those days.
And that was true.
Did any Aggie try to
sell you on anything that was goofy was there anything you know i think there was a lot of things that were done kind of illegal in those days and everything i understand i really think i was kind of a high profile recruit and the and i think there was such a fear of that that even my summer job that a m got for me was a crummy job you know i mean it's hard to work for a guest company and i had to dig
holes in the alleys to fix gas leaks, and since I was the youngest guy, I had to crawl down in the hole, you know, and that was the kind of summer job I got, and it wasn't even an Aggie that had the company.
That was the summer after Husker.
And do you remember what the pay was?
Minimum wage, and that would have been a dollar and a quarter an hour.
And they were, and OU, I heard the guys that went to OU got oil field jobs making, you know, five dollars an hour and all this stuff and, you know, but they were so afraid of, you know, of getting in trouble and it worked out just fine.
The weekend you were here you went to a baseball game.
anything else?
Well, Coach Thomas wasn't here because of the Southwest Conference track meets going on.
It was up in Fayetteville.
And they flew him back on a private plane with Danny Roberts and I think probably Ted Nelson came back on that tour.
Danny was the Southwest Conference champion, record holder in the shot put.
And Ted Nelson was a great quarter miler from Andrews, Texas that was a legend already in West Texas.
I remember going to a track meet when I was a sophomore in high school in Andrews.
and they had his picture on the cover of the telephone book.
I said, guys, big time.
Coach Thomas did something that was kind of unique in recruiting.
Probably wasn't as flashy as a lot of the recruiters are today.
He sent me a postcard from every track meet.
It was just a little A&M postcard, but on the top they had caricatures.
And they had old Sarge, which is not, he's on the outs today a little bit.
They don't, the image, you know, but he's a rough looking,
guy in uniform doing particular different sports.
For track he was a shot putter.
And you know that's a little touch, but he wrote me this and he said well Ted Nelson did this and Danny threw this and just went down the list and I knew those guys.
When I got down here to visit I knew all those guys.
I'm not sure he even thought it out and planned it that well, but I mean I felt like I was part of the team before we got down here.
and uh but anyway they flew back on a private plane coach that thomas didn't like flying on little planes and he was scared flying back and had some rough weather to get back and but i was well taken care of by shelby metcalf who was taking me around and that's always a calculated risk you either took to shelby or he didn't in those days and i took to him and a matter of fact
I liked him so much I wanted to play basketball, even though I didn't think that was a thing to do.
And eventually I did.
Played for him.
Now, what was your impression of the campus when you saw him?
Well, it was my kind of place because it was about 8,000 students then.